Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
It would be hard to find anyone who knows more about the Brazos Valley than General Joe Hanover.
He moved to Wheelock with his family in 1925 when he was just seven years old, and except for the five years he served his country during World War II, has called the Brazos Valley home practically his whole life, including the 25 post-war years with the 420th Engineering Brigade on Carson Street in Bryan, his final assignment being its commander.
Texas A&M class of 1940.
Please welcome General Joe G. Hanover to Veterans of the Valley.
It's an honor to have you here, General Hanover.
Thank you.
1936, you started at Texas A&M, and you actually commuted from Wheelock to Texas A&M, and you did that with an old, old car that your granddad had given you, right?
Tell us about that.
Well, he had an old 28 or 29 Chevrolet that he told me he could spare.
Yeah.
If I could keep it running and keep enough people to ride with me, either work A&M or students, to help me with the expenses, then he'd let me use it.
Right.
Well, I wasn't able to stay in a dormitory back in those days.
So I got that old thing going, and I always had a load.
Right.
And so that's part of the way that my expenses played to go A&M.
One of the people that you brought back and forth, I believe you told me, was a young lady named Lucille Scasta, right?
That's right.
Who you later married.
And were married for 63 years.
Funny thing, she didn't pay any rent.
She didn't pay any rent.
She rode for free, did she?
How about that?
Class of 1940, that means that you got to, when you had time to watch a little football, you saw the national championship team in 1939.
Did.
Yeah.
That was wonderful.
Football was
King at that time on the campus, of course.
Indeed, indeed.
As it still is, maybe someday we'll have another one.
Who knows?
And then I also saw the 1940 team that never lost a game until the Thanksgiving game.
Had we won that game, I understand we would have gone to the Rose Bowl.
Right, right.
Only chance, I guess, to ever go to the Rose Bowl.
You graduated in 1940 with a degree in civil engineering and went to work in Hearn for the highway department.
But then in February of 41, you got your orders and you were in the military.
Sort of take us from there.
And what happened after that?
Well, I got my orders in February of 1940, 41.
Right.
And it said the report to the 54th Coast Artillery in parentheses, COL.
I had no idea what that meant.
I had to report to Fort Crockett in Galveston and got down there and that meant it was a colored unit.
The enlisted men and the NCOs were colored and the officers were white.
We gathered at Fort Crockett to sort of get organized and there was a camp being built about eight or 10 miles out of Galveston called Camp Wallace.
And when that got adequate enough for our troops to move in, we moved out there.
Had no streets and it was mud and sort of
low area but we moved in there and that's where our troops began to assemble and came to us and we would issue their equipment and it was a six inch gun outfit called Coast Artillery.
The mission of the Coast Artillery is the same name implies was to guard the coast of America.
Right.
And we got our guns and
They were old World War I guns, had rubber tires, solid rubber tires, and were pulled by a tractor.
It was called a mobile unit.
Not very mobile with that sort of a towing equipment, but it was termed mobile.
Right.
And we stayed there for until, I guess, during the summer of 42, summer of 41.
41.
And we were moved to North Carolina.
Camp Davis.
They built a camp about 30 miles out of Wilmington.
And our mission there would have been to set up on the coast
There was a lot of submarine activity on the East Coast.
And that was to be our mission temporarily, it turned out to be.
To check and see what those subs were doing.
Keep an eye on them.
Now, you were at Camp Davis on December the 7th when Pearl Harbor was attacked.
I was.
What do you recall about that Sunday and what you were doing and how you heard about it?
Well, we thought we were going to get two weeks of Christmas vacation.
And my wife had gone home and I was going to join her back in Wheatlock for Christmas.
So she was not at the home with me.
So I went to the movie on December the 7th and got out of the movie and went by a filling station and the radio was blaring and I said, what's happening?
Somebody said, did you hear what happened at Pearl Harbor?
And I said, no, I didn't have them at Pearl Harbor and didn't pay much attention to it.
Went on down the road a little ways and there was some more racket going on and I stopped and I said, what's happening?
And they said,
Well, the Japs had burned Pearl Harbor.
And I said, my Lord, what's happened there?
So I went on home and out at the camp, every radio in the camp was on, of course.
And everybody was listening to the president speak and to everybody talking and deciding who was going to do what.
And the activity really did pick up.
Right.
With the attack then obviously the Japanese became in their mind a bigger threat so your unit was moved to the west coast in the spring of 1942 I guess it was within the next spring.
Talk about what your assignment was there, interesting assignment.
Well we had, this was a regiment and the regiment had three battalions I guess it was and each battalion had four guns as I remember and we were, we had a mission
all the way from San Francisco to San Luis Obispo.
We had guns at Santa Cruz and San Jose and several different locations.
And an interesting thing, one set of guns were right under the Golden Gate Bridge.
And the purpose of that was the harbor defenses of San Francisco
were the big guns up high so they could shoot way out.
When I say big guns, those were 14 inch probably.
And they could have come in underneath the defilade of the big guns.
They put our guns right down under the Golden Gate Bridge, so if something came in under, we could take them on as a target.
I see.
So it's sort of interesting to know that part of our people served there for several months right under the Golden Gate Bridge.
But my assignment at that time was I was a maintenance officer for the brigade.
And the maintenance officer's responsibility was the maintenance of the entire regiment, which entailed traveling up and down the coast from one installation to the other to coordinate with the people as to the maintenance of the vehicles, tractors, and all the rolling stock.
Another thing you told me was that they would have target practice, and you would lay out targets out in the water.
We have a picture of one of those targets coming up later.
But you supervised a survey crew that kind of laid the guns, and I guess you used your education as a civil engineer in using triangulation to do that.
Talk a little bit about that.
Well, people that know about triangulation or the two sides and the
included the baseline, know that you can lay out the baseline with a known length, and you can then, by triangulation, tell how far the target is or how far you need to shoot.
So part of my responsibility was to help lay out the baseline.
It had to be known exactly the exact length, and I had to
former survey crew out of these boys that didn't know an instrument from a pencil.
So to start doing that I had to teach them a little bit of triangulation and a little bit of math and all that.
So that was another one of my assignments.
It turned out to be pretty good.
So all you kids out there who think that math and arithmetic doesn't do you any good, you can prove them wrong.
I can prove them wrong.
Indeed.
It was finally determined that the Japanese weren't going to attack the west coast of the United States.
That job disbanded, and you went to Fort Rucker, Alabama when you were a captain.
Sort of take us from there.
Well, after they decided that Coast Artillery was losing its real importance or necessity, they took these boys that were in this Coast Artillery unit and made them into combat engineers.
And they didn't need them on the West Coast, and
So I took one of the battalions back to Camp Rucker, Alabama.
I was the leading officer on the train with about 400 of the boys.
And we traveled from California to Camp Rucker, Alabama.
And I turned them over to the engineers there.
And I was relieved from assignment from them.
Right.
It's about this time that you
You received a two-month sale date to Europe, so you knew that you were going to go and be involved in the war in Europe.
Well, I went first.
I had to go to engineer school.
Right.
I applied to change my commission from Coast Artillery to Engineer.
And they sent me to a six week school up at Fort Belvoir.
When I got back from there, they had me assigned as a company commander for an engineer maintenance company.
Which does all type of maintenance for any type of engineer equipment.
Had 185 men and five officers.
I didn't know not one single one of them.
I had to learn all them as well as to get acquainted with being in command of this engineer unit and as you mentioned, we had a sailing date of two months.
Right.
Let's go ahead and move to that.
That was February of 1945 is when you sailed and you talked about the trip over to France in a converted ocean liner and you weren't sure you were even going to make it to the war.
That trip was so rough.
Talk about that.
Well, it was winter time and they told us we were going to travel what they called the northern route.
I presume for as much safety from submarines as possible.
There were probably 30 ships in the convoy, and we were circled by Navy vehicles all around for protection.
And the second day out, we hit a storm, as they say, very usual in the northern route.
And for two nights and one day, that ship turned every way over.
would rock to the side and back the other way and the waves would go over the deck and the front end would come up off the water and come back down and pat like a dog and the rear end would come up and the propeller would go that way, you know, and there were 5,000 of us on the ship that
In peacetime, I presume would have carried about four or five hundred passengers as a cruise ship.
And that thing, there were 5,000 and I think 4,900 of them were six.
And everybody wanted to be on the top bunk, as you can imagine.
Right.
But you made it.
It was a 12-day trip.
We made it.
It landed at La Hague, France.
Before we go to some photographs, talk a little bit about what your job was in Europe.
I know that it was sort of a separate company.
You finally went into Belgium, at Liage Belgium, and sort of talk about what your job was.
I know you kept cranes in order that were unloading boats and all that.
Tell us about what you did.
Well, one of our big missions, after we got off and were in Hassel, Belgium for a while,
Got our equipment all unpacked and finally got a mission and they sent us to Liège, Belgium.
And Liège was on a big canal.
It was a big engineer depot and they unloaded all the barges with cranes.
Drag line is a better terminology for a lot of people.
There were some 40 of those things unloading equipment and it took a whole lot of maintenance and maintenance people to keep those things going.
And we also got equipment back from the front that had either been damaged or totally blown up.
And we could either fix them or issue them a new one.
And we repaired little generators or any type of engineer equipment.
And a lot of these cranes that we were talking about were actually run by German POWs.
They were.
Interesting.
Very interesting.
And then later you were moved to Antwerp, I believe, and did essentially the same thing.
Is that right?
Well, one of my platoons went to Antwerp.
Just one platoon went to Antwerp.
And during that time, they were subjected to the buzz bombs that came over.
I see.
Let's go to some pictures now.
We've got...
eight or nine photographs that you've supplied to us out of a magnificent photo album.
And let's go to those and take a look at them.
They're right there.
If you can tell us that's a young Joe Hanover about how.
I guess that's right when you... First went on active duty.
When you first went on active duty.
So you weren't very old then.
What were you about?
Well, that was in 41, I guess.
So I was 23.
About 23 years old.
All right, raring to go.
There's you and Lucille.
You were married soon after you got out of Texas A&M because you said she wouldn't marry you until you got a degree and got a job, right?
That's right.
She told me that several times.
And you did both of those, and you got married.
Right.
Good-looking couple.
Where was that taken?
Do you recall?
That was taken at Camp Davis, North Carolina.
OK.
In 1941.
All right.
Here's you and a buddy in an old automobile.
That was a 1940 Plymouth that we bought just before they quit making them.
And we drove that during the whole war.
That was a friend of mine from up in Iowa.
I see.
Okay, let's move on.
This is one of the targets that we were talking about off the west coast.
You can see the pontoons.
on it.
So you all constructed this pretty much, right?
Yeah, I built that with some of my troops and that was towed.
It would float and it was towed about a thousand feet behind the towboat.
So it wasn't in the danger of shooting and hitting the towboat.
I see.
Somebody hit the target you can see there.
As you can see.
Okay, let's move on.
Tell us about, this was taken in Corpus Christi.
Tell us about this.
Well, I convinced the Army that we ought to learn to be transported by air for some thing it might develop that needed engineers and be too far away to go by truck.
And after much convincing, they agreed to let the Air Force Reserve fly us out there.
And we loaded equipment and men in those planes and flew from Corpus Christi to New Mexico.
Wow.
Those are big transports.
Talk about this.
This was a little bit later on.
Well, we were working for the
Air Force in San Antonio.
And the fact that we were working with the Air Force, if I needed the plane to go on one of my reserve missions, they'd send me an airplane.
And that's one of the trips.
And I just took the advantage of sticking my head out and letting them take my picture.
Just noticed my star on the plane.
Yes, sir.
Here's one of your promotions.
Yes, that's General Cliff Semang, who was the brigade commander just prior to my assumption.
That may be my star that he put on.
Now this is you on the right, and you're sort of briefing some pretty high-ranking generals there.
Yeah, we were always getting some
and somebody would have to brief them as to what we were doing and what kind of progress we were making.
And at the time, I was the operations officer and had the privilege of briefing the generals.
Were you nervous?
Well, I'd say no, but you know that's not right.
Probably a lie, right?
Probably were.
At one time, we briefed
12 stars.
It was a four-star general, a three-star, a two-star, and two one-stars on the seat right in front of me.
Oh my goodness.
You had to be nervous that you were getting it right.
Okay, and I believe this is our final picture.
This is the Chief of Army Engineers in Washington.
was privileged to go up on a visit one time and got the opportunity to visit with the chief of engineers.
And that was what that picture was taken was in his office.
That's some great photographs.
I need to move along a little bit because I want to get you back to Brian to the 420th.
But it ended up you didn't come home until 1946.
You stayed over there a while even after the war was over.
You had different duties.
There were a lot of just downtime that you took a jeep and traveled around.
You said you played a lot of baseball.
You were even given a job over a company of German POWs.
So there was a lot of things you did in Europe after the war was over.
That was a most unusual assignment.
There was a camp of German prisoners of war, about 6,000 of them, and they divided them up into companies.
And they had a lot of work to be done.
And they assigned me as a company commander of 250 Germans to do some electric work, carpenter work on tents that were being used to transport to
people in route back home or to the Pacific or different places.
Makes the tents a little bit more comfortable.
I had that job for about three months.
It's a little bit unusual to command a German company.
I would imagine it was.
February 1946, you finally get the orders to come home.
Like many of the people who served in Europe, you originally thought that you were going to prepare to go to the Pacific for a ground war there.
That obviously did not happen.
You joined the 420th Engineering Brigade in Bryan over on Carson Street.
And for most of your military career, that's where you were, 25 years there.
Talk about that operation and that unit.
In the last five years of your military career, you were its commander.
Tell us about that.
Well, we started, of course, like anything else, on a very limited scale.
First time we went to summer camp, I think we went in two Greyhound buses.
That was the extent of the brigade.
And we probably had three or four typewriters.
a few things like that very very small beginning as anyone would think and the brigade began to grow and assign different units under our command and we planned and
coordinated activities of the number of people going to summer camp.
The brigade at that time had under its responsibility all the engineer reservists, now be specific, engineer reservists,
in Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Louisiana.
We had unit stations in each of those states.
And of course they had to go to summer camp in various places and we had to arrange for all that and find something for them constructively to do at a summer camp.
It wasn't too hard to find work for engineers to do on a post or installation.
You did a lot of travel to these four states, obviously, because you were the main guy in charge of supervising this, right?
Right.
And you talked about engineering is really a vast field, obviously.
You were involved with Green Beret schools, even diver schools, and lots of other educational opportunities, right?
Yeah, I went to several different schools.
I went to USC one time for a week of military orientation of some siren.
I went to Utah one time to what they called the
CBS school, which is biological, chemical.
I went to the Green Beret School in North Carolina.
I went to Command General Staff School.
I went to the Army War College.
I had a great, great variety of opportunities during the time I was in that brigade.
We've got just a couple of minutes left.
I want you to talk about, I think that this is just fascinating.
You and Lucille, you were married in 1940 after you got out of Texas A&M, but you actually started the first grade together.
We did.
So she was a lifelong partner, was she not?
She was a lifelong partner.
She was a great partner.
Yeah, we dated all through high school and went to school in Wheelock.
And at that time, you couldn't graduate.
And we actually went to the 10th grade.
And just before we got into the 10th grade, they started bussing the school to Franklin.
So I actually graduated from Franklin High School.
And she went to Waco to Business College and was there a year and got her degree as a stenographer and got a job at A&M.
Of course, I was going to school and she was working and that's when I propositioned her to marry me.
And 63 years that you all were together, we're just about out of time.
I wish we had had more time to talk about it.
I'll just mention it real quick about how in your retirement years,
You went out to Hearn, and you bought the Railway Express office out there, and you moved it to Snook, and you've got a living house out there.
That's just fascinating.
I wish we could make a whole show just out of that, but thank you very much for your service, and congratulations in your retirement, and thank you for everything you've done.
My pleasure, and Tom, I appreciate what you do for these shows.
It's been a great education for me, and I know a world of people in the community.
Well, I appreciate that.
Thank you very much.
Appreciate it.
Joe and Lucille Hanover were married 63 years before her death in 2003.
They had a daughter, Jo Seal, who lost a battle with leukemia in 1983.
He lives in Bryan in the same house that he and Lucille built in 1957.
Joe Hanover is indeed a son of the Brazos Valley, and we thank him for his service.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.